The first thing I want to say is that I love you.  Gabriella, I have loved you ever since we found out that you were on the way. I loved your image on the ultrasound, trying to grasp something with your hand.  Because you were early, your first cry was the most beautiful sound I had ever heard.  I have loved you all of the years since.  Even when I haven't expressed it very well. Even after we no longer lived under the same roof.  Hieu, I love you because you love Gabriella and she loves you.  I hope we get to know each other better to build on that relationship.

It may seem ironic for me to offer advice on marriage, but they say that mistakes are the best teachers so by now I must qualify for an advanced degree.  In recognition of my own failings I will make a few observations, and you can take them for what they're worth.

The first and most important thing is to love each other.  That sounds awfully trite.  What do I mean by "love"?  True love seeks what's best for its beloved.  It liberates, rather than constrains.  I'm not talking about the marriage vows -- those set boundaries that you have agreed not to cross.  But in all other things, love seeks to expand the other's freedom instead of constricting it.  The true lover wants the beloved to become their most complete and authentic self.  Love requires courage to accept that the beloved will grow and change, rather than trying to pin them down like a butterfly specimen.  Love requires faith that the relationship will also mature to embrace what each of you become as you change and grow.

True love must learn not to fear hearing hard truths, nor to fear speaking them.  Avoiding such conversations will bury the truth like a worm that eats away the marriage, so having the courage to speak and to listen is a commitment to endure discomfort for the sake of staying close.  Failing to do so is giving up on the relationship.  Of course, you don't need to be accusing or defensive -- both are signs of an overwhelming fear.  If you can't trust that your partner will handle the matter with a caring heart, then you've already got big relationship issues.  Blame is not the name of the game, coming to a mutual understanding is.  Present the issue as something to work on together.  Done well, this will increase your trust in one another.

One source of fear is what is known as the Imposter Syndrome.  It goes like this: "I don't really know what I am doing here, so I need to put on a brave front to assert my authority."  Guess what: in marriage nobody knows what they're doing!  It's always learned on the job.  Better for both partners to admit that up front, and to work things out together in humility.  Real humility is simply acknowledging the truth about ourselves, and we cannot sustain a relationship in which we are not being our true selves.

You will have to find the right balance between independence and reliance on each other.  Everyone needs their own space and responsibility, but not too much.  You will need to balance that between the two of you also.  If one of you becomes overly dependent on the other, then that one becomes powerless while the other becomes overburdened.

Intimacy requires vulnerability, which literally means "able to be wounded".  Holding each other close means that sometimes you'll step on each other's toes, and you have to risk that in order to stay close.  But never accept intentional harm -- that's abuse.  May you be able to tell the difference.

You have both studied psychology, so I shouldn't need to tell you all of this.  But sometimes it's harder to apply to yourself in real life.  The last thing I'll say is: love each other.  And know that I love you.  May you have many happy years!
