Proper 27

Readings: Psalm 70; Wisdom of Solomon 6:12-16; Matthew 25:1-13

When asked to go to the Diocesan Convention in Juneau this past September, I accepted with mixed feelings.  I looked forward to meeting new people from all across Alaska, but frankly I dreaded the inevitable discussions around the future of the church.  For the last several years at least, the thread of those discussions has become quite predictable:  the church is dying, numbers are down, how will we keep the doors open?  What often follows is some new program designed to energize the church and remake it into something more relevant, more appealing, more marketable.  While I have no doubt that these schemes are all well-intentioned and may work for some, in my experience they only distract us for a while and produce no real change for the better.

So I braced myself when Bishop Mark rose to give his address.  He began by quoting the verse from Ephesians that is in the Daily Office:

Glory to God whose power working in us can do infinitely more than we can ask or imagine: Glory to God from generation to generation in the Church, and in Christ Jesus for ever and ever.

He then asked: "Whose power is it?" and waited for us to respond, "God's power."

"Where do we see that power at work?" he asked, and we responded, "in the Church, and in Christ Jesus for ever and ever."

The bishop continued:

The power of God is at work: In you; in this Diocese; in this Church; and in Jesus Christ.

Let us never forget that.

I start with this point because it seems to have become a persistent concern, an overbearing topic of discussion and worry, in the Church in general and in the Episcopal Church specifically, that the power of God is fading; that the Church is dying; that the future of faith is rapidly coming to an end.

Last week I attended a House of Bishops meeting where one of our presentations was “on the numbers”—the bleak parochial report numbers. Please believe me, I am not discouraged by numbers. As the bishop of Alaska, I know very well that a community of 3 or more people gathered in the name of Jesus is a living, vibrant, faithful example of the living church. I don’t engage in too much hand wringing and worry about the life of the Church—I leave that to God. So, while I share the “numbers” with you, just know that the data tells a story, but not the whole story. The Holy Spirit is working despite the numbers.

Needless to say, he had me by this point.  If you haven't heard or read his full address, I urge you to do so.  You can find it on the Diocesan website on the 2023 Convention page at https://episcopalak.org/download/3444/?tmstv=1699494921

The program that we need as a church is the one we have had from the beginning.  Although it is not in the manuscript of his address, I distinctly remember the bishop saying that if we follow Christ's teaching and truly love each other as we love ourselves, then we won't need to worry about the numbers.

A lot of our angst about the decline in church membership and giving is the result of our clinging to a mid-twentieth-century idea of the role of the church in society.  When I was a kid, going to church was one of the things you did as a good citizen.  It upheld the established order.  It was part of your support for God and country and your local high school sports team.  As such though, the church had lost its edge – over a long time it had become increasingly difficult for the church to speak out against the excesses of those in power and in favor of the oppressed.  In fact, those who did agitate for change often found themselves at the barrel-end of pulpit rhetoric.  The church had a strong incentive for maintaining the status quo, which inspired a fear of real transformation at either the societal or personal level.

We had seen all this before.  In the old Roman empire, religion was very little more than a tool for the state to maintain unity and order.  When Christianity brought a faith of personal transformation along with a leveling of societal hierarchies through mutual love and self-sacrifice, the perceived threat to the status quo brought persecutions.  But the message of hope that the church professed overpowered the force of the state and drew many converts.  You want an example of a program to grow the church that actually worked?  Try martyrdom.  I'm only partly joking.  The choice that persecution forced made it abundantly clear that the church offered a hope that was distinct from anything provided by the empire.

When Constantine made Christianity the state religion, that distinction quickly faded, and the church became largely an arm of the state.  Sensing that something had been lost, Saint Anthony and others left the world and went into the desert to seek the true meaning of their faith.  These became the Desert Fathers and Mothers, the earliest Christian monastics.  Hence, monasticism has always had an uneasy relationship with the organized church, because the church increasingly sought organizational stability while monastics often pursued a transformation of life that could not be so easily regulated.  I would even say that many of the Protestant movements began as an outgrowth of this same conflict of goals.  It's too bad that most of them eventually also devolved into champions of the status quo.

Perhaps the church’s recent loss of status in society is actually a gift – an opportunity to more freely and authentically champion the personal transformation that we’ve been preaching for centuries.  Bishop Mark in his address called on us to be "outposts of hope" in our communities.  In military terms, an outpost is a camp in a remote location, separated from the main army.  The image that I get from the bishop's use of the word then is that the church is no longer the occupying army that it once was.  We are smaller groups, with more distance between our camps, in a foreign land.  In the game of chess, an outpost is a square that is protected by a pawn in or near the enemy's stronghold.  We are surrounded by the enemy, but we have an important job to do.  Our enemy is the growing despair in our world, but our weapon is hope.

What is the hope that we can bring?  It is the love of God.  The love of a God who comes to us where we are, in self-sacrifice for our sakes, and impels us to do likewise for each other.  But often we can't start with those words because they, too, have been co-opted for harm in many people's pasts.  Instead, we start with action.  A helping hand. A free meal with no strings attached. A warm place to spend the night.  A listening ear.  A shoulder to cry on.  All of these things say, "I care about you."  It's important that when we do these things, we make that message of love clear.  We don't just give and turn away -- we give so that we can turn towards them and they towards us -- so that they can know that we see them as sisters and brothers.  This can only happen in personal encounters.  Institutional change can be beneficial and worthwhile, but it doesn't communicate that kind of love.

And we don't stop there.  If we truly love others, we want to bring them even more hope.  Meeting their immediate needs is important, but it is only the first step to personal transformation.  We must do what we can to continue to lift them up, as we would do for our own family members.  We also have to be willing to let go of our precious ideas about how they should be transformed, in response to what God reveals.  We might be surprised to find that they can lift us up as well.  That is how the church is built up in love, regardless of who attends services.

Our gospel lesson today is Jesus' parable of the wise and foolish bridesmaids.  The stated moral at the end admonishes us to "Keep awake, for you know neither the day nor the hour".  But the moral inherent in the metaphor of the story is "bring along enough oil for the duration."  This parable encouraged the early church to persevere during the years of persecution.  It can also serve as an encouragement to us.  In these dark times of isolation and despair, the lamp of hope is burning low for many.  May God grant us the Holy Spirit in ample supply to fuel hope in ourselves and in each other.

