Proper 15

Readings: Psalm 67, Isaiah 56:1,6-8, Matthew 15:(10-20),21-28

When I agreed to do the sermon today, Mother Julie instructed me to let Kit know whether to read the whole gospel lesson, or just the unbracketed part.  Without even looking at the reading, I replied immediately, "Always include the brackets.  Let us have no sanitized gospel."  I didn't know at the time that the passage in question is about cleanliness -- more about that later.  Often in the lectionary, the passages that are marked as optional are the narratives that might make us uncomfortable with what the Bible says.  For example, Psalm 137, that beautiful psalm of lament that begins with "By the waters of Babylon, we sat down and wept / when we remembered you, O Zion" ends with a desire for revenge against Babylon in the form of a blessing upon "he who takes your little ones / and dashes them against the rock!"  Those final verses are often bracketed to save us the trouble of wrestling with how they fit into a Christian view of scripture.  Personally, I think that it's precisely the difficult passages of the Bible that call us to spiritual growth by preventing us from being able to pigeon-hole the message of the Bible in a tidy, consistent, non-threatening theology.  Let's not clean up the Bible to remake it in our own image.

But sometimes the brackets are for other reasons.  Long lists of names or places, repetitions, or narratives that don't seem germane to the message of the passage as a whole are often marked as optional to spare the reader's voice and the listener's attention.  If I had to guess, I would say that the latter reason applies to today's brackets.  You may have noticed a theme running through all of our readings today: that God is the God of all peoples, not just Israel.  The passage from Isaiah says "my house shall be called a house of prayer for all peoples"; our Psalm says "let all the peoples praise you" and "may all the ends of the earth stand in awe of him"; and our gospel lesson contains the familiar story of how the Canaanite woman receives healing for her daughter through the humble persistence of her faith even though she is not a Jew.  The first part of this reading, which is about ritual cleanliness, seems unrelated to that theme -- more about that later.

If anything, the non-optional part of this gospel reading is the harder part for us to swallow.  Not that we have any trouble accepting the faith of the woman or her inclusion, but rather that the early champion of her exclusion in this story appears to be Jesus!  After initially ignoring her pleas, he tells her "I was sent only to the lost sheep of the house of Israel."  When she persists, he replies, "It is not fair to take the children's food and throw it to the dogs."  Rather than taking offense at being called a Canaanite dog, she accepts the designation and humbly pleads for "the crumbs that fall from the master's table."  Jesus is apparently impressed with this posture and grants her request.

How do we interpret Jesus' actions here?  From a literary perspective, Jesus' objections force the issue of whether he is the savior of all people, or only the Jews -- but it would seem to be more in character for the disciples to voice that in their customary ignorance and to be corrected by Jesus.  The very difficulty posed by Jesus here gives the narrative a ring of authenticity, because it is not theologically neat and tidy.  Was this a learning moment for Jesus, when he began to see his purpose as something universal, beyond redeeming Israel alone?  He certainly must have been aware of the many passages in the Hebrew Bible that hint at universalism, including our other readings today.  Compare his conversation with the woman at the well and his response when the Greeks wished to see him in Jerusalem.  Perhaps he adopted the exclusivist stance here precisely in order to explode it.  Or was Jesus testing the woman, to see if her faith was deeper than a desire for miracles?  The humility that she was willing to embrace in order to have any leverage at all showed how deep was her love for her child and how firm was her faith that Jesus could cure her if only he would.  I don't find it necessary to decide on any one of these interpretations, and perhaps all of them could be said to be true at some level.  If we decide that we know what the passage means, then we prevent it from further transforming us.  Being able to sit with ambiguity and paradox opens us to the potential for illumination.

In the broader context of the gospel, this passage certainly aligns with the theme of our other readings today, that God accepts true faith without regard to nationality.  We could add: without regard to tradition.  That's where our bracketed portion of the gospel ties into the story.  I don't think the juxtaposition of these two narratives is accidental or unrelated.

The Pharisees were a sect within Judaism whose purpose was to purify the people of Israel through strict adherence to the Torah and the traditions of the elders.  Their intentions were good -- the Hebrew prophets had made it clear that the Babylonian captivity and everything else that had ever gone wrong since were the direct result of disobedience to God, so the Pharisees sought to eliminate all disobedience to the Torah and add a buffer of further caution just to be sure.  The name "Pharisee" literally means "separated one" -- separated from all forms of impurity, from Jews who did not adhere to the same practices, and of course from Gentiles.

The Pharisees complain to Jesus that his disciples don't wash their hands before eating.  The hand-washing of the Pharisees was not driven by any knowledge about germs and the spread of diseases, but rather by their observance of traditions that made them, in their own eyes, special before God.  This practice, along with many others such as their overly strict observance of the sabbath, provided a measurable way to place themselves above others.  Since they believed themselves to be God's chosen, all those who didn't practice as they did were therefore not God's chosen -- in fact they were a potential cause for God's wrath.  What began as a desire to obey God became a mechanism for exclusion.

Jesus responds that what comes out of your mouth is more damaging than what goes into it.  Not that Jesus wants us to stop washing our hands, but rather that true purity is purity of spirit.  That kind of purity is much more difficult, is impossible to measure, and cannot be used to exclude others.  In fact, it calls us to a humility that realizes how incapable we are of achieving it.  It therefore drives us to be compassionate towards others, to help each other on the way, and to love each other.

So we see that the two parts of our gospel lesson fit together.  God welcomes those who come in faith, regardless of nationality or tradition or any of the other ways in which we do not welcome each other.  Teach us, O God, to embrace each other as you embrace us.  Teach us to look not at the surface we present to the world, but deep within our hearts.
