Epiphany 4

Readings: Micah 6:1-8; Psalm 15; [I Corinthians 1:18-31]; Matthew 5:1-12

A superficial reading of our texts for today yields three checklists.  Micah asks, "what does the LORD require of you?" and lists three things in response.  Our Psalm asks, "Lord, who may dwell in your tabernacle?  Who may abide upon your holy hill?" and lists eleven qualifications.  Jesus in Matthew's Gospel lists eight categories of people that are "blessed", with the understanding that the more of these you belong to, the better.  One might be tempted to write all these things down and try to check off as many as one can each day.  A closer reading of each of them in context, though, will reveal why such an approach could be self-defeating.

Micah prefaces his question ("what does the LORD require of you?") with a related question: "With what shall I come before the LORD?"  He then offers potential answers in the form of sacrificial observance: burnt offerings, yearling calves, thousands of rams, rivers of oil, even the ultimate sacrifice of one's firstborn.  The answer to all of these is no, they are not enough and they are beside the point.  God only wants you to "do justice, love kindness, and walk humbly with your God."

The word "justice" (Hebrew משפט, mishpat) is from the same root as the word for "judge" and thus means to render an appropriate verdict.  Often in the Hebrew Bible this refers to providing justice to the oppressed (the widow, the orphan, and the stranger) in spite of the influence of the powerful.  More broadly, it can mean doing what is right regardless of the cost.  This would correspond to many of the qualifications in our Psalm, especially "who leads a blameless life and does what is right, who speaks the truth from his heart."

The word translated as "kindness" here is the Hebrew חסד chesedh, a word that I talk about in nearly every sermon I give.  The King James often translates it as "mercy," but more modern translations come closer to the original meaning with "lovingkindness".  It means to do for others more than what is expected from you, out of a genuine concern for their well-being.  It is used hundreds of times throughout the Hebrew Bible, often with God as the subject but also many times referring to human action.  Micah says that we must not just do this, but love it.  It has to come from the heart.

"Humbly" translates the Hebrew word הצנע hatznia`, which is a passive form of "to humble" -- in other words, "to be humbled" while "walking with God".  Being present to God naturally yields humility, for we realize how far greater than we are is God, and how nothing that we have done merits our acceptance into God's presence -- hence the insufficiency of the sacrifices mentioned above.  But there is another side to this: humility also enables the intimacy with God that is here depicted in the metaphor of "walking with God."  Attempting to be in God's favor though our own efforts is doomed to failure.  God's favor comes only thanks to God's own lovingkindness (chesedh) shown to us, and even though God is always present for us, we won't be present to God until we see this.

Thus, Micah's prescription is not a list of things to achieve, but rather a state of heart and mind to adopt, which will then of course be manifested in actions of justice, love, and humility.  We can also ready Psalm 15 in a similar way: these are not qualifications for entry so much as they are evidences of the one qualification: a pure heart.

Now let's turn to the Beatitudes. "Blessed" translates the Greek μακαριοι makarioi, which means "supremely blest, fortunate, or happy."  Jesus begins by applying that epithet to the poor, thus standing the assumed state of affairs on its head.  In Luke's version of the beatitudes (Luke 6), "in sprit" is omitted, and it is clear that material poverty is intended because of a contrasting woe to the rich.  Why are the poor fortunate?  Because even though they have nothing material, theirs is the kingdom of heaven.  There has been a lot of debate over what the "in spirit" in Matthew signifies, but here is my understanding.  "The poor" (πτωχοι ptochoi in Greek) may correspond to the Hebrew word ענוים anavim, which was used so often in the psalms and the prophets that it came to stand for not only the poor, but for the righteous generally (those who take the side of the poor, and also those who do not have an attachment to their wealth).  Perhaps Matthew includes "in spirit" to indicate that broader applicability, while Luke studiously records the literal saying.  Matthew certainly opens the door to yet another interpretation: not only a spirit of poverty, but also a poverty of spirit.  This aligns with humility, as in Luke's parable of the Pharisee and the tax collector.

"Blessed are those who mourn, for they will be comforted." This may have an apocalyptic signification (God will set all things right, and wipe away every tear as in Isaiah 25:8), and it may also be part of Jesus' more general teaching of the inversion of the perceived order of things: the first shall be last and the last first.

"Blessed are the meek, for they will inherit the earth."  The word for "meek" (Greek πραεις praeis) means "gentle" or "mild."  This corresponds in some degree to "the humble." That they "inherit the earth" contrasts them with the usual rulers of the earth, who are not meek or gentle, but rather conquerors.  This verse is an almost word-for-word quotation from the Septuagint (Greek) version of Psalm 37:11, where "the meek" (πραεις) are contrasted with evil-doers.  It's worth noting that in the Hebrew of that Psalm, the word for "meek" is `anavim, which can also mean "the poor" as discussed earlier.  This Psalm uses 40 verses to recommend patiently waiting for the Lord to turn the tables.  It reminds me of, and may have even been an inspiration for, Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.'s statement that "the arc of the moral universe is long, but it bends toward justice."

"Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they will be filled."  The Greek word for righteousness is δικαιοσυνην dikaiosunen, which refers to an equitable state of affairs, and thus should probably be translated as "justice" instead.  This corresponds, then, to Micah's call to "do justice."  Jesus is saying that if you truly hunger and thirst for justice, you will find it.  In fact, you'll get your fill of it.  The Greek word χορτασθησονται (chortasthesontai) means sated or gorged.  The act of seeking justice is itself an act of justice, and justice begets justice.

"Blessed are the merciful, for they will receive mercy."  The root of the words translated here as "merciful" and "mercy" is the Greek ελεος eleos, which probably corresponds to the Hebrew chesedh that we discussed in the reading from Micah.  The blessing "for they will receive mercy" sounds almost like quid pro quo, which is absolutely opposed to the spirit of chesedh.  In order for it to be true mercy, there must not be any reward in view.  Jesus may be referring to the ultimate righting of all things, but perhaps we can see a more immediate truth in this.  The act of going beyond ourselves in compassion brings its own reward home to our hearts, enlarging them with God's own lovingkindness.

"Blessed are the pure in heart, for they will see God."  "Pure" here is the Greek καθαροι katharoi ("clean") which evokes the Hebrew word טהור tehor that is used of ritual purity throughout the Torah.  As in Micah (and Hosea, Isaiah, and the Psalms), Jesus is here dispensing with ritual observance in favor of a purity of the inner person.  In much of the later Christian mystical tradition, this purity denotes a purging of all attachment to the small self and its desires.  When that self-emptying occurs by God's grace, then we are truly united to the likeness of Christ -- and being united to God we see God.

"Blessed are the peacemakers, for they will be called the children of God." The "peace" part of "peacemakers" is the Greek ειρηνη eirene, which comes from a verb meaning "to join."  In other words, peace is a coming together of previously opposing sides.  Since God seeks unity in love, those who make it happen are God's children.  The concept of peace in the Hebrew Bible is more multi-faceted.  The familiar word shalom means perfection or completion.  The root originally denoted paying back, including completely paying back your enemies by destroying them.  It is still used in Modern Hebrew to refer to paying a bill.  If Hebrew informs Jesus' word choice here, then "peacemaker" may mean more than preventing conflict.  We are called to establish unity by making all parties whole.

"Blessed are those who are persecuted for righteousness sake."  Again, "righteousness" here is the same one used in verse 6, and refers to justice.  "Blessed are you when people revile you and persecute you and utter all kinds of evil against you falsely on my account."  Why? Because that's what they do to prophets -- to people who speak the truth to power while living out all of the other characteristics mentioned above.  Congratulations, the rest of your life is toast.  Here's your cross.

So we see that God's call as expressed in the beatitudes and elsewhere cannot be treated as a checklist that we can mark off and go on about our lives.  The problem with ritual sacrifice was not that it involved unnecessary killing of other creatures (although that doesn't recommend it either), but that it wasn't enough.  It was humanity's attempt to replace giving ourselves to God by giving something we valued instead.  It was checking a box so we could go on about lives.  God doesn't want our checkboxes.  God doesn't want our checks.  God doesn't want us here in church every Sunday.  God doesn't want any of these things if they act as a substitute for the transformation of our entire lives in love and service to God and to others.  If being here on Sunday inspires and impels you to that transformation in your daily life, then church is doing its job.  If writing that check comes from a heart of lovingkindness instead of self-justification, then that is part and product of your ongoing transformation.  

May all of us be inspired to strive for justice out of a spirit of lovingkindness and humility as we walk together with God in Christ.  Amen.
