Epiphany 6

Readings: Jeremiah 17:5-10; Psalm 1; I Corinthians 15:12-20; Luke 6:17-26

In our reading from Jeremiah, and also in our Psalm for today, those who put their trust in God are compared to a tree that is planted by streams of water -- bearing fruit and having healthy foliage, able to withstand dry periods.  Conversely, those who turn away from God are like a shrub in the desert or chaff blown in the wind.  They have no sustenance from roots, so they have no power to persist.  This is a common theme throughout the Bible -- God cares for those who trust in God, but those who don't are doomed.  The frequency with which this point has to me made indicates that it is not entirely obvious.  It is not clear, when we look around at the world today or at any time in the past, that the oppressors are condemned and the oppressed are vindicated.  Far from it.  We see injustice trampling the innocent every day, often with no relief in sight.  Does God really care?

Msny Biblical passages, especially in the Psalms, address this dissonance between faith and experience.  Psalm 73 describes the problem well:

	...I envied the proud
    and saw the prosperity of the wicked:

	For they suffer no pain,
    and their bodies are sleek and sound;

	In the misfortunes of others they have no share;
    they are not afflicted as others are;

	Therefore they wear their pride like a necklace
    and wrap their violence about them like a cloak.

	Their iniquity comes from gross minds,
    and their hearts overflow with wicked thoughts.

	They scoff and speak maliciously;
    out of their haughtiness they plan oppression.

	They set their mouths against the heavens,
    and their evil speech runs through the world.

	And so the people turn to them
    and find in them no fault.

	They say, "How should God know?
    is there knowledge in the Most High?"

	So then, these are the wicked;
    always at ease, they increase their wealth.

	In vain have I kept my heart clean,
    and washed my hands in innocence.

	I have been afflicted all day long,
    and punished every morning.

But then the author's perspective changes:

	When I tried to understand these things,
    it was too hard for me;

	Until I entered the sanctuary of God
    and discerned the end of the wicked.

So the psalmist concludes that justice is not defeated forever, it is only delayed.  God will set things right, eventually.

The expectant hope for justice deferred became a defining feature of early Judaism, especially after the Babylonian captivity.  It informed the development of the idea of a coming Messiah who would set everything right again.  That's the backdrop for the Beatitudes.  Jesus, the Messiah, is bringing the kingdom of heaven, which will set things right by turning them upside down.  The existing order, the kingdom of this world, is unjust and merciless.  It must be superseded by a kingdom of mercy and justice.  Standing at the inauguratiuon of this new kingdom, Jesus proclaims:

Blessed are you who are poor,
for yours is the kingdom of God.
Blessed are you who are hungry now,
for you will be filled.
Blessed are you who weep now,
for you will laugh.
Blessed are you when people hate you, and when they exclude you, revile you, and defame you on account of the Son of Man. Rejoice in that day and leap for joy, for surely your reward is great in heaven; for that is what their ancestors did to the prophets.

To all those who are oppressed now, Jesus proclaims that their vindication is coming soon.

Luke's version of the Beatitudes differs somewhat from the more familiar account in Matthew.  Perhaps the most notable difference is that in addition to the "blesseds," Luke follows with a corresponding set of "woes":

But woe to you who are rich,
for you have received your consolation.
Woe to you who are full now,
for you will be hungry.
Woe to you who are laughing now,
for you will mourn and weep.
Woe to you when all speak well of you, for that is what their ancestors did to the false prophets.

The restoration of justice has two sides.  The oppressed will be vindicated, and the oppressors will lose their advantages.  But the final "blessed" and "woe" indicate that this will not happen instantaneously.  There will still be a period of time in which the righteous are maligned and the unjust are praised.

All of this sounds very dualistic.  Us (the good folks) versus them (the oppressors).  But I don't think that Jesus is just cheerleading for the home team.  If our gospel lesson were two verses longer we would have read "Love your enemies, do good to those who hate you, bless those who curse you, pray for those who abuse you."  Jesus isn't trying to deepen divisions between us, he is rather calling us to recognise where we are aligned, so that we can realign ourselves with mercy and justice.  We pray for our oppressors that they may see that they are on the road to destruction and embrace the path of love and life instead.  We should also recognize that each of us must also make that choice every day, for we all have both selfish and generous impulses.  That is why we pray "thy kingdom come, thy will be done, on earth as it is in heaven."  Amen.
