Thank you for inviting me here to talk with you today about tolerance.  I'm struck by the generosity of your invitation, which is itself a "deeds not creeds" statement on today's topic.  I am an Episcopalian, a traditionally trinitarian denomination.  In recent decades, tolerance has been growing in the Episcopal Church, but it has not always been one of our shining virtues.  We have learned a lot about tolerance from your Unitarian Universalist traditions.  So I address you today with humble thankfulness, hoping that you will get something useful from this encounter.

What do we mean by tolerance?

In its most basic definition, tolerance is permitting conflicting differences to exist.  To tolerate something does not mean that you agree with it.  It only means that you allow it to be embraced by others.  You don't make it your mission to stamp it out.  You can be an atheist and I can be a theist, and we don't have to kill each other (or engage in the social media equivalent).

But often when speaking of tolerance we mean something more: an appreciation of our diversity.  This requires a good deal of humility, because we must shed our sense of superiority.  My way is not the only way, it may not even be the best way, though it seems best to me for now.  I am far from perfect on my own path.  What can I learn from the experience of others?

An even further step is advocacy: defending the rights of others to be different, championing the cause of those who are being silenced or persecuted.

Why tolerance?

It doesn't seem to come naturally to us.  Human history is crowded with examples to this day of attempts to establish uniformity of belief and practice, and to instill fear of the other.  This may have helped some cultures to survive. But along the way a few began to see that widening the circle of trust and cooperation beyond these boundaries could create even better outcomes.  Thus a tension arises between those who wish to impose the safety of control and those who embrace the fruitful chaos of diversity.  Of course, that conflict can and often does exist within an individual.

When I was a child in the Southern Baptist Church, we sang "Jesus loves the little children, all the children of the world."  Despite the cognitive dissonance of singing this in an all-white Sunday School, this song presented a moral imperative for tolerance of perceived racial and ethnic differences.  In our various traditions, we can find numerous other moral injunctions to be accepting of one another, even though they are sometimes wedged between examples of the acceptance of dominator culture.  Given that confusion, as well as the diversity of our backgrounds, let's leave the moral arguments for now (good as they may be) and focus on the pragmatic.

Any breeder knows that purity in breed can lead to certain diseases, because of a lack of diversity in the genes.  A diverse genome helps to ensure that potentially harmful recessive genes are not doubled, and also that genes that could be used for future adaptation are passed on.  Greater diversity means more options.  The same is true in the world of ideas.  To claim that we know the One True, Immutable Way is the height of hubris.  A diversity of perspectives offers more options.  We often learn and grow the most by engaging with those with whom we disagree the most, and even small differences of perspective can be illuminating.

Most of what we disagree about are not in the set of verifiable facts.  If they were, we should be able to end the argument quickly.  Rather, we mostly argue about two kinds of topics: (1) statements that cannot be verified, and (2) what course of action should we take?  In the case of unverifiable statements, there is really no point in arguing whether they are true or not.  However, they are often asserted not so much to increase the store of knowledge as to motivate or inform some action in response.  In that case, we have to acknowledge the uncertainty with which we approach that decision.  A diversity of perspectives can help us weigh both the probability of the alleged state of affairs and the wisdom of the proposed course of action.

One fallacy that often leads to stubborn certainty is the notion that for every question there is one "right" answer.  I can tell you from experience that even in a highly deterministic realm such as software development, this couldn't be further from the truth.  Every decision has trade-offs, so the solution you want depends on what you're optimizing for.  If you're trying to make it run as fast as possible, then you often sacrifice maintainability (the ability of anyone, including yourself, to make changes in the future).  Creating the best experience for the user is often at odds with imposed deadlines for product delivery.  Do you use the tools and platform that your people know, or do you switch to a technically better approach that will take time for your team to learn?  Similar dilemmas face most questions about what course of action to take.  Thus, values often weigh more heavily than facts in decision-making.  What is important to each stakeholder?

We should also recognize that the rational part of any discussion is but the tip of the iceberg of what is going on interpersonally.  Why did that person bring this topic up to begin with?  They may have more riding on it than what they say or even know.  Of course, we have to be careful about presuming what is not stated.  We are not omniscient or perfectly empathic.  But one of the most frequent unintentional sources of harm is when we focus on the rational elements of a discussion without heed to the emotional dynamics.  Noticing emotional reactions with empathy can help to resolve conflict.  Is being right really more important to you than your relationship with this person?

How far can we go?

Can we be tolerant of all perspectives?  Can we tolerate the intolerant?  I like to think that in the world of ideas, people should be allowed to think whatever they want, drawing the line at causing harm to others.  I wish that line were clearer than it is, though.  Ideas are powerful motivators of behavior, but we don't want to have thought police.  Knowing how and when to step in and resist requires keen discernment, and a compassionate approach.  Reconciliation is the goal, even if it falls short of agreement.

What do you think?

Let me hear the diversity of your ideas on this subject.


