Proper 10

Readings: Deuteronomy 30:9-14, Psalm 25:1-9, Colossians 1:1-14, Luke 10:25-37

Today's Gospel reading from Luke contains so many insights that I feel like a child in a toy store, with the time constraints of this sermon acting as the parent limiting the number of things I can take out of it.

It begins with a lawyer who stands up to test Jesus with a question.  A lawyer in this context (Greek νομικος, nomikos) is one who studies the law, or Torah -- the first five books of the Hebrew Bible.  Most religious Jews of this period agreed that keeping these laws was extremely important.  The ancient prophets had interpreted the Babylonian exile centuries earlier as punishment for not keeping the law, and the same interpretation was applied to every other conquest by a foreign power, including the then current occupation by the Romans.  If the people only kept the law, then these foreign invaders would be vanquished and the kingdom would be re-established under the coming Messiah.  That future event gathered increasingly apocalyptic qualities, including an anticipated resurrection of the just at the end of the age.  The Pharisees in particular believed striongly in that event, which is probably what the lawyer is referrring to as inheriting "the life of the age" (Greek ζωην αιωνιον, zoen aionion).

In the parallel accounts in Matthew and Mark, the lawyer's question is somewhat different: "What is the greatest commandment?"  And Jesus answers that question directly.  In Luke's account, the question is about inheriting the life of the age (which is often translated as "eternal life"), and Jesus' reply is to ask the lawyer what he thinks the answer should be.  It's as if Jesus perceives that the lawyer already has an answer ready -- as any good lawyer would -- and he does.  He quotes two passages from the Torah: Deuteronomy 6:5 ("You shall love the LORD your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your might") and Leviticus 19:18 ("you shall love your neighbor as yourself").  Jesus commends this answer, and says "Do this, and you will live" -- which sounds simple enough,

But the lawyer knows that this is no easy task.  He can think of a lot of people, even whole classes of people (like the Roman occupation) that he would love to hate.  He thinks of these people every time he reads Psalm 109 with its litany of curses against an enemy.  So, to more clearly define his obligation, the lawyer asks, "Who is my neighbor?"

It's a fair question, because the word in both Greek and Hebrew is vague.  In Greek, πλησιον (plesion) just means "someone nearby."  In the Hebrew of the Torah, רע (re`a) means a companion -- but like many Hebrew words it comes from a root word with a more concrete meaning: grazing.  You're a metaphorical sheep, and your neighbor is another sheep who is also grazing nearby.  That image opens the possibility that "re'a" might not nned to include people who aren't part of our "herd" -- maybe it could exclude Romans and other Gentiles, maybe even Samaritans who don't worship the same way we do, maybe even Jews who don't keep the law perfectly.  So tell me Jesus, who does it include?

The lawyer's question seeks to limit the scope of neighbor love.  The parable that Jesus tells in response blows away all boundaries.

A man is going down from Jerusalem to Jericho, a descent of more than 3300 feet over 18 miles that provided lots of places for robbers to hide in ambush.  He is robbed, beaten, and left half dead.

"By chance" a priest comes along.  The Greek for "by chance" is κατα συνκυριαν (kata sunkurian) which occurs nowhere else in the Bible.  Literally, it means "according to with-the-Lord" -- which was an idiomatic expression for something that happened unexpectedly, but it implies a divine cause.  In this story, the fact that the first person to discover the victim is a priest could not be more appropriate.  The job of the priest was to lead the people in the fulfilment of the law, which should include love of neighbor but often focused instead on the measurable observances such as ritual cleanliness.  Leviticus 21 prohibits priests from touching the body of a dead person except in cases of a very near relative,  Even touching human blood would make the priest unclean, and therefore rabbinic law prohibited that as well.  Helping this man would greatly complicate the ritual life of this priest, and besides it looks like he is going to die anyway so why bother?  Someone else can clean it up.  So, the priest passes by on the other side to ensure that no incedental contact occurs.

Next comes a Levite.  Levites functioned in a similar role as deacons do in modern liturgical churches:  they assisted with worship, but were not allowed to perform all of the priestly functions.  Their rules for purity were not as stringent as the rules for priests, but contact with blood would still render them ritually unclean for the rest of the day.  So our Levite, too, decides that the inconvenience is more burdensome than leaving someone to die.  He, too, walks by on the other side.

Finally, a Samaritan approaches.  The Samaritans were (and still are!) an ethnic group in the central region of Palestine around Samaria (near modern Nablus in the West Bank).  They have their own version of the Torah, written in a script very similar to the early Hebrew script.  They claim descent from the Northern tribes of ancient Israel, an origin story that differs from the Biblical account in II Kings and II Chronicles.  They trace the ancestry of their priests all the way back to Aaron.  Mount Gerizim, near Shechem, is a holy place for them -- in contradistinction to Jerusalem.

Because of their similarites and differences, the Samaritans were despised by the Jews of Jesus' time.  To the Samaritans, the differences between them were only religious, while the Jews held that there was a racial difference as well.  According to Kings and Chronicles, the Samaritan population was largely composed of foreigners brought into the region by the Assyrians after the conquest of 721 BC, making them racially impure.  The Samaritans did not accept that narrative.

So it must have been somewhat startling to Jesus' audience that the hero of the story, the one who shows compassion, is a Samaritan.  This is a calculated effect on Jesus' part -- he is representing his conviction that the focus of the Jewish religion of his time on ritual observance has created boundaries between people that thwart the "weightier matters of the law: justice, mercy, and faithfulness" (Matthew 23:23).

So Jesus takes the lawyer's question "Who is my neighbor?" and turns it inside out -- changing it to "How can I be a neighbor -- to everyone?"

In our own time, we continue to draw boundaries that define who our neighbors are -- and aren't,  Surely we don't need to show compassion to immigrants who brought it on themselves by coming here illegally.  Why should we help people with addictions, the unemployed, or the homeless -- they must have made some poor decisions and helping them will only encourage it.  How could we possibly love people who are trying to destroy civilization with their politics or their ideas about sexuality and gender?

Why should I spend my time and money helping people I don't even know when I could be building wealth for my family instead?  Shouldn't I protect that wealth by supporting zoning laws that keep multi-family and low-income housing out of my neighborhood?  Neighborhood.  What would Jesus think of our desire for "exclusive neighborhoods?"

May God grant us a true and lively respect for the dignity and worth of every human being, and teach us to love all of our neighbors as ourselves.  Amen.
