Great Vigil of Easter

Readings: Exodus 14:10-15:18

Gather 'round, children, and I'll tell you how it was.  I was just a little taph-taph myself then, about four years old, but I remember it like it was yesterday.  I didn't know then why we were leaving our home, but everybody else we knew was doing it too, so along we went.  I asked my mama about it, and she just said, "Don't you worry, child.  Trust in God.  God's taking care of us."  As we walked along I thought to myself, "Sure woulda been taking better care of us if God had given us something to ride on," but I kept that to myself.  

Towards evening, we finally set up camp near the Sea of Reeds.  I was too tired to even want to play on the beach.  But just as we were getting settled, people started yelling that the Egyptians were coming!  Everyone seemed really scared, so I asked my mama, "What's the matter?"  She said, "Oh child, just hold onto me and trust that God will take care of us."  But it sure didn't seem to me that anybody else was doing that.  Besides running around and screaming, a lot of accusations were flying.  They were blaming Moses for bringing us all out into the desert to get killed by the Egyptians.  Then Moses, he just stood tall and told 'em to shut up.  He told 'em to just be quiet and let God save them.  Well, that agreed with what my mama said so it must be right, I thought -- and I was so tired I just dozed off in her arms.

In the early morning before dawn, mama shook me and said, "C'mon, we got to go!"  I was still rubbing my eyes as she pulled me along to the shore -- or rather, where the shore had been!  The water in the Sea of Reeds was all gone!  That woke me up!  People were walking across to the other side, and we started walking with them.  I remember how the wet sand squished between my toes, but it was firm enough to walk on.  There were all kinds of interesting things in the seabed that I would have liked to stop and look at: shells and rocks, tiny creatures, strange plants I had never seen before.  But mama kept pulling me along by the hand like we didn't have time for anything.  Everybody else seemed in a big hurry too, so I didn't argue -- much.  

Then somebody yelled that the Egyptians were coming up behind us, and that made everybody move even quicker.  Mama picked me up and ran with me.

But the Egyptians didn't catch up to us.  That wet sand wasn't firm enough to hold up their chariots.  Their wheels dug in and kept them from moving forward, and then the horses would cross up and fall down and flip the whole mess over.  They couldn't even retreat without leaving their chariots behind.  Some did even that, but not one of them made it out of there, because not long after the last of our people climbed out on the opposite shore, we all saw something that took our breath away.  A huge wave of water, like a moving wall, swept back into the sea bed and washed all those Egyptians away, along with their chariots and their horses.

All of our people started celebrating, jumping around and singing!  But I was sorry for the horses.

"You see," mama said with shining eyes, "how God's taking care of us?"  But I wondered when's God gonna take care of the horses?  They weren't any better off under the Egyptians than we were, but we got away and they didn't.  That didn't seem right to me.  Maybe someday I'll understand.

Something else that didn't seem right, and still doesn't:  after a deliverance like that, you would think we wouldn't ever doubt that God was taking care of us.  But we did, and we still do.  Yet there's no denying that it was a miracle.  Oh, you might know reasons why that thing with the sea happened.  But listen: my mama held my hand as we walked across that sea with our people.  Of all the people who wanted to harm us, not one got across.  If that ain't a miracle I don't know what is.

So, children, like my mama said, trust in God.  Even when you don't understand, maybe especially then.  There will be times when you feel like you're trapped.  They're coming for you, and you got nowhere to go.  Just when you think it’s all over, God might surprise you with a way out that you never would have thought of.

